Klusta-Team file format
=======================

(we should find a name for this file format)


Overview
--------

This file format deals with multichannel extracellular recordings. The recordings made during an experiment are saved in a small set of files that contain unprocessed (raw) and processed data as well as detected and sorted spikes. These files are handled by all programs of the suite: KwikKonvert, KwikScope, SpikeDetekt, KlustaKwik and KlustaViewa.

The files are either [binary HDF5 files](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_Data_Format), or text-based files written in a human-readable structured format.

Conversion tools from the previous file format (supported in NDManager, NeuroScope and Klusters) to the new format are provided.


File format specification
-------------------------

  * All data corresponding to a given experiment are stored in two HDF5-based files:
      
      * the **KLX** file contains the **spiking data**
      * the **KLD** files contain the **(un)filtered data**

  * The KLX file contains all **scientific metadata** necessary for any analysis.
      
  * Non-scientific **visualization-related metadata** is stored in the **KLA** file (a JSON text-based file).
      
  * All files contain a **version number** in `/` (VERSION attribute), which is an integer starting at 1.

  * The input files the user provides to the programs to generate these data are:
  
      * the **raw data** coming out from the acquisition system, in any proprietary format (NS5, etc.)
      * processing parameters (PRM file) and description of the probe (PRB file)
  
  
### Software-generated files

These files should not be edited in normal circumstances. They are generated by the programs as a function of the user inputs. All these files have a common filename prefix, i.e. `myexperiment20130801.klx`, `myexperiment20130801.raw.kld`, and so on.

The KLX and KLD files are HDF5 files. They are handled by the Python programs through the [PyTables](pytables.github.io) library. They can be read by any HDF5/NetCDF4 library or viewer in any programming language.

Any HDF5 file contains a hierarchy of **groups** (folder-like) and **datasets** (file-like). A group can contain sub-groups and datasets (heterogeneous tables or multidimensional arrays). Any group can have **attributes** (metadata), which are simple key-value associations. Any group or dataset has a POSIX-like **path**, the root being `/`.

We detail here in detail the internal structure of the files. 


#### KLX

The HDF5 **KLX** file contains all spiking information.
 
  * `/metadata`: *group* with:
      * `PRB_JSON` (string): the PRB file in JSON
      * `PRM_JSON` (string): the PRM file in JSON

  * `/shanks/shankX/` ( *X* being the shank index, starting from 1): *group* with the spikes detected on that shank.
  
  * `/shanks/shankX/spikes`: *table*, one row = one spike, and the following columns:
      * `time`: UInt64, spike time, in number of samples (max ~ 10^19)
      * `features`: Float32(nfet,), a vector with the spike features, typically nfet=nchannels*fetdim+nextrafet, with fetdim the number of principal components per channel
      * `masks`: UInt8(nfet,), a vector with the masks, 0=totally masked, 255=unmasked
      * `cluster_auto`: UInt32, the cluster number (max ~ 10^10), obtained after the automatic clustering stage
      * `cluster_manual`: UInt32, the cluster number (max ~ 10^10), obtained after the manual stage
  
  * `/shanks/shankX/waveforms`: *table*, one row = one spike, and the following columns:
      * `waveform_filtered`: Int16(nsamples*nchannels,), a vector with the high-pass filtered spike waveform. Stride order: sample first, channel second.
      * `waveform_unfiltered`: Int16(nsamples*nchannels,), a vector with the raw spike waveform.
      
  * `/shanks/shankX/clusters`: *table*, one row = one cluster, and the following columns:
      * `cluster`: UInt32, the cluster number
      * `group`: UInt8, the cluster group (max = 255)
  
  * `/shanks/shankX/groups_of_clusters`: *table*, one row = one cluster group, and the following columns:
      * `group`: UInt8, the group number (convention in KlustaViewa: 0=Noise, 1=MUA, 2=Good, 3=Unsorted)
      * `name`: String(64), the group name
  

#### KLD

The HDF5 **KLD** files contain all non-spiking (raw or filtered) information.

  * `.raw.KLD`:
      * `/metadata`: a *group*, duplicate from KLX. Since the KLX is always created after the KLD, and the dead channels should only be specified at the level of the KLD file (KwikSkope), we will always have the same information in the two files.
      * `/data_raw`: [EArray](http://pytables.github.io/usersguide/libref/homogenous_storage.html#the-earray-class)(Int16, (duration*freq, nchannels)) with the raw data on all channels
  
  * `.high.KLD`:
      * `/data_high`: high-pass filered data
  
  * `.low.KLD`:
      * `/data_low`: low-pass filered data


#### KLA

This JSON text file contains aesthetic information about the channel and cluster colors, the channel positions and scaling, etc. It does not contain any scientific information.

    {
        "channel_height": 0.25,
        "lastviewed_x": 0.24,

        "channels":
            [
                {
                     "0": {"group": "0", "name": "ch0"},
                     "1": {"group": "0", "name": "ch1", "channel_height": 0.1},
                     "2": {"group": "0", "name": "LFP", "color": 12},
                     "3": {"group": "0"},
                     "4": {"group": "0"},
                     "5": {"group": "0"},
                     "6": {"group": "0"},
                     "7": {"group": 1, "name": "ch7", "ypos", 0.25},
                     "8": {"group": 2, "name": "Sync Pulse", "voltage_gain_multiplier": 1.2, "visible": false}
                },
            ],
            
        "clusters":
            [
                {"0": {"color": 3}},
                {"1": {"color": 4}},
            ],

        "groups_of_channels":
            [
                {
                     "0": {"name": "Hippocampus", "color": 14},
                     "1": {"name": "Prefrontal Cortex", "visible": false, "color": 13},
                     "2": {"name": "Auxiliary Data", "color": 2}
                },
            ],

        "groups_of_clusters":
            [
                {
                     "0": {"color": 1},
                     "1": {"color": 2},
                     "2": {"color": 3}
                     "3": {"color": 4}
                },
            ],
    }



### User-provided files

These files are provided by the user to the programs, which uses them to process it, and optionally integrate them in the program-generated files.

#### PRB

This JSON text file describes the probe used for the experiment: its geometry, its topology, and the dead channels.

    {
        "shanks": 
            [
                {
                    "index": 0,
                    "channels": [0, 1, 2, 3],
                    "graph": [[0, 1], [2, 3], ...],
                    "geometry": {"0": [0.1, 0.2], "1": [0.3, 0.4], ...}
                },
                {
                    "index": 1,
                    "channels": [4, 5, 6, 7],
                    "graph": [[4, 5], [6, 7], ...],
                    "geometry": {"4": [0.1, 0.2], "5": [0.3, 0.4], ...}
                }
            ]
    }


#### PRM

This text file (written in a tiny subset of Python) contains all parameters necessary for the programs to process, open and display the data. Each line is either a comment (starting with #) or a `VARNAME = VALUE` where VARNAME is the variable name, and VALUE is either a number, a string (within quotes), or a list of those. This structure ensures that it's easy to read/write this file programmatically.

    EXPERIMENT_NAME = 'myexperiment'
    INPUT_FILES = ['n6mab041109blahblah1.ns5', 'n6mab041109blahblah2.ns5']
    PRB_FILE = 'buzsaki32.probe'
    SAMPLING_FREQUENCY = 20000.
    DEAD_CHANNELS = [2, 5]
    NBITS = 16
    VOLTAGE_GAIN = 10.
    # ...
    
    # SpikeDetekt parameters file
    # ...


Relation with the old file formats
----------------------------------

### Where do the old files go?

  * CLU ==> KLX
  * RES ==> KLX
  * FET ==> KLX
  * SPK ==> KLX
  * DAT ==> .raw.KLD
  * FIL ==> .high.KLD
  * EEG ==> .low.KLD


### Conversion

The **KwikKonvert** tool converts from the old formats to the new ones.

  * With a PRM file:

        # Write a .raw.KLD file.
        kwikkonvert myexperiment.PRM
    
  * With command-line arguments (low priority):
    
        # Write a .raw.KLD file.
        kwikkonvert mydatablah1.ns5 mydatablah2.ns5 [--name mydata] [--probe myprobe.probe] [--x myxml.xml] [--nchannels 32] [--freq 20000] [--nbits 16] [--ignore-channels 1,2,3]


### Export

Some programs may need to export the data in old or open formats to simplify subsequent analysis.


#### KwikSkope

Automatically save in:

  * .KLA: aesthetic information about channel groups and colors
  * .PROBE: dead channels


#### SpikeDetekt

Automatically save in:

  * .KLX: spikes and trivial clusters (cluster = 2 for all spikes)
  * .low.KLD, .high.KLD: filtered data
  * .RES: spike times

  
#### KlustaKwik

  * .KLX: load spikes, save cluster_auto


#### KlustaViewa

Automatically save in:

  * .KLX: clusters, group of each cluster, group names
  * .KLA: aesthetic information, cluster colors, group colors
  * .CLU: clusters, with noisy clusters merged in clusters 0 and 1. WARNING: there shouldn't be good clusters 0 and 1!


Workflow
--------

The idea is that the PRM file contains all information required for the programs to run correctly.

  * Step 1: create a PRM text file, with the input files (in NS5 or anything), the probe files, various parameters...
  * Step 2: run KwikKonvert to create a .KLD file.
  * Step 3: run KwikSkope to view the raw data, and tag bad channels. The program requires the PRM file to know where to save the dead channels (in the PROBE file specified in the PRM file).
  * Step 4: run SpikeDetekt (using the PRM file, linking to the PROBE file and the KLD files).
  * Step 5: run KlustaKwik.
  * Step 6: run KlustaViewa.


Things to do before August 16th
-------------------------------

Priority: from very low (---) to very high (+++).


### [C] KlustaViewa
  
  * (+++) Implement load/save features in KLX, KLA
  * (+++) Implement version in the file format
  * (+++) Release KlustaViewa 0.2.0 and test it.
  * (++) Implement export in CLU, FET
  

### [C/M] KwikKonvert

  * (++) Implement "load PRM"
  * (++) Implement NS5 and DAT loading with memory mapping
  * (++) Implement .raw.KLD writing
  * (+) Implement a basic command-line interface
  * (+) Move all shared code in KlustaLib.
  

### [M] KwikSkope

  * (+) Implement a standalone GUI that can load a KLD file.
  * (-) Implement "mark as bad channels"
  * (-) Implement "change the channel colors"
  * (--) Implement channel groups (list of groups, move channels between groups, change group color)
  * (---) Implement "change channel position"
  * (--) Fix the coordinate jitter problem



